What is a church to do in the time of the coronavirus pandemic? For many religious traditions, gathering for worship is not just a friendly suggestion. Some Jewish practices require groups of 10. Muslims consider Friday’s congregational prayer one of their most important. Catholics celebrate the Eucharist together during Mass. As the German Lutheran theologian Dietrich Bonhoeffer wrote in 1930, “A Christian who stays away from the assembly is a contradiction in terms.”

And yet, for the time being at least, mass gatherings are fueling a public-health crisis, and many state and local authorities are banning gatherings of 50 or more people. Can the government, in a country where freedom of religion and freedom of assembly are sacrosanct, close churches? As a matter of public health, churches should follow these prohibitions. But as a legal matter, must they? The short answer is that in this case, government restrictions extending to churches are almost certainly legal. What’s interesting is why.

The precise legal analysis is complicated by the fractured landscape surrounding the free exercise of religion. The confusion began with a 1990 decision, Employment Division v. Smith, that dramatically lowered the level of constitutional protections for free-exercise claims, in a case involving Native American spiritualists seeking an exemption from a law banning the use of peyote. Subsequent legislative and judicial responses to that decision at the federal and state levels created a patchwork landscape for adjudicating free-exercise claims, introducing different standards of review depending on the jurisdiction or nature of the claim. Today, if a church challenged a shutdown order from the federal government, the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA) would require that courts review the order with the highest level of judicial scrutiny. However, if the challenged shutdown order came from a state or local government, RFRA would not apply, and the claim would depend on state constitutional and legislative protections, and their interpretations by state courts. (A later law amending RFRA, the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act, would possibly, though not at all certainly, increase the level of scrutiny applied to state and local restrictions.)

Let’s assume for the sake of argument that a church challenging a shutdown order would receive the highest level of legal protection, a test referred to by courts as “strict scrutiny.” Under this test, the government would need to articulate a compelling interest, and its directive would need to be narrowly tailored and executed in the least restrictive means toward accomplishing its interest. That’s a very high standard, and one that is not usually satisfied. But the government is likely to meet it here. The widespread protection of human life is clearly a compelling government interest, and in the specific circumstances of this crisis, given what we know now of the virus, a shutdown order, especially one aimed at gatherings over a certain size, is both narrowly tailored and the least restrictive means.

All shutdown orders include exemptions for hospitals and certain essential government services, some of which will necessarily require large groups of people to congregate. This introduces a strange irony to the analysis. In most free-exercise cases, when the government grants a nonreligious exemption to a generally applicable law, that exemption weakens the government’s claim to a compelling interest. For example, in a well-known opinion from his time on the Third Circuit, then-Judge Samuel Alito concluded that a single nonreligious exemption to a police-department policy prohibiting beards on officers (the nonreligious exemption was for medical conditions) required the department to grant a religious exemption. After all, if the law were really so important that it required stifling a fundamental right to the free exercise of religion, then how could the government justify other exemptions?

The question of how many and what kinds of nonreligious exemptions will necessitate a religious exemption is much debated among courts and scholars, but that debate takes an odd turn in this context. Social distancing presents a kind of collective-action problem: It’s only going to work if most people decide to follow along, even if their own individual preferences would have them do otherwise. But of course, hospital work and other essential functions must carry on. The strange outcome of this is that the necessary exceptions actually strengthen the compelling nature of the government’s interest in everybody else’s compliance. Houses of worship must practice social distancing to ensure that room remains for the few necessary exceptions. As long as the government can justify its exceptions, its legal position is strengthened rather than weakened by including them. (It would be a different story if a shutdown order exempted restaurants but not churches—in that case, the nonreligious exemptions would not seem as justified.)

Why then, do some state and local shutdown orders appear to exempt churches? One reason could be bad legal advice: The legal landscape is complicated, and some decision makers might be relying on general notions of “religious liberty” or “the separation of church and state” that do not accurately reflect the law. Another reason is political: Churches and houses of worship are important anchor institutions in many communities, especially in times of humanitarian crisis. Civic leaders may be trying to show goodwill and avoid applying a heavy hand, particularly knowing that they will need to partner effectively with religious institutions in the coming weeks and months.   

The good news is that every major religious tradition has theological resources to adjust to challenging and unforeseeable circumstances. For thousands of years, soldiers, missionaries, and humanitarian-relief workers have had to improvise their worship gatherings in extraordinary times. We have already seen major religious bodies, including the Roman Catholic Church and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, impose regional or global restrictions on their worship. The greater challenge lies with less hierarchical churches and houses of worship that do not answer to higher religious authorities, but will instead make decisions based on their own discernment and expertise. Here, churches not formally subject to shutdown orders should err on the side of caution and choose to suspend their services. And they should absolutely comply with orders that do not exempt them, as they are required to do.

The public-health evidence makes clear that houses of worship should limit their gatherings, whether mandated or simply encouraged by government officials. And they should do so in willing partnership rather than bitter acquiescence. Many religious traditions have some version of love of neighbor and caring for the least of these as moral imperatives. As the Christian author Andy Crouch recently advised, one of the best ways to demonstrate that love now is by suspending physical gatherings, including worship services—for the sake of our neighbors.

First, many religious leaders modified their rituals, hoping to contain the spread of coronavirus. Now, some are taking more drastic measures, canceling worship services, closing religious schools and shuttering holy sites.

Like sports leagues, museums and other cultural institutions, millions of churches and mosques, synagogues and sanghas, temples and gurdwaras are temporarily closing to guard against spreading the virus.
For many spiritual leaders, the decision to shut their doors is difficult. Religious rituals are meant to be enacted, soul and body, traditionally alongside other believers.
But the present dangers of the deadly virus are too great to ignore, many religious groups have decided, leading to a cascade of cancellations worldwide in the last 48 hours.
On Sunday, the Vatican announced that Holy Week celebrations in Rome, events that typically draw thousands of pilgrims from around the world, will be closed to the public because of the
"current global public health emergency." The Pope's weekly public audiences have been suspended until April 12 but will be live-streamed by Vatican News.

Globally, more than 140,000 people have contracted Covid-19, according World Health Organization. Several governors in the United States have banned gatherings larger than 250 people as a result.
"For many Christians, the very concept of not gathering as the people of God is unacceptable," wrote evangelical leader Ed Stetzer. "We love gathering in person — with feet and faces — but for now, we may best love our neighbor by gathering via electrons and avatars."
But with Easter, Ramadan, Passover and other holy days approaching, coronavirus will undoubtedly upend religious lives in 2020.
Here are some examples of how the pandemic is already affecting congregations and believers throughout the world.

On Thursday, leaders of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints told its 15 million members worldwide all public gatherings would be suspended until further notice. None of Mormonism's 30,000 congregations will gather for sacrament meetings this Sunday, or for the near future.
"Bishops should counsel with their stake president to determine how to make the sacrament available to members at least once a month," the Latter-day Saints leaders added.
Meanwhile, more and more US Catholic dioceses and archdioceses have canceled Mass and nearly 20 have lifted the obligation to attend Mass. Other dioceses are encouraging older Catholics to stay home or to forgo the sacrament of Communion.
On Friday, the Archdiocese of Chicago, which serves more than 2 million Catholics, suspended public Masses as of Saturday evening and closed the archdiocese's 200 schools.
"This was not a decision I made lightly," said Chicago's Cardinal Blase Cupich in a statement.
"The Eucharist is the source and summit of our life as Catholics. And our schools and agencies provide essential services to many thousands."
But, Cupich said, "it is clear that we must take the better part of caution in order to slow the spread of this pandemic."

Cupich may take comfort in the idea that his boss, Pope Francis, lives under similar restrictions.
The Diocese of Rome has closed its chapels and churches, and its iconic St. Peter's Square is eerily empty of tourists and pilgrims. A church historian told CNN the shutdowns are unprecedented, the first time in centuries the Eternal City's holy sites have been closed.
In Washington, the Episcopal and Catholic dioceses also closed public services, after an Episcopal rector who gave Communion and shook hands with worshipers became the first confirmed Covid-19 case in the nation's capital.
But not every church is closing.
In Portland, Oregon, Archbishop Alexander K. Sample urged priests to "be creative" in making the sacrament of Communion accessible while abiding by Gov. Kate Brown, order canceled all public gatherings of more than 250 people.
After initially announcing that it would leave the decision to attend Mass up to Catholics' judgment, the Archdiocese of New York canceled services starting Sunday. Churches will remain open for private prayer, the archdiocese said.

For many Muslim men, group prayers on Friday are a religious obligation. But as congregations across the country and the world weighed whether to stay open, experts in Islamic law stepped in.
One of the more influential statements came via the Islamic Society of North America. Together with Muslim medical experts, the society strongly recommended that congregations take precautions against the pandemic, including immediately suspending congregational prayers, Sunday school, and other community gatherings.
"It is our moral duty as Muslims that we take all steps necessary to safeguard ourselves and others around us from this terrible disease," the Fiqh Council of America wrote in the society's statement.
"One's personal desire to do obligatory prayers at the masjid (mosque) or fulfill other religious duties comes secondary to ensuring the common health of the larger community."
Muslims in Kuwait, Germany, Iran and other spots around the world have also suspended services as of Friday.
Some Muslim leaders in America are urging their communities to be prepared for a protracted fight against coronavirus.
