5 ways nutrition could help your immune system fight off the coronavirus

The coronavirus presents many uncertainties, and none of us can completely eliminate our risk of getting COVID-19. 

But one thing we can do is eat as healthily as possible.

If we do catch COVID-19, our immune system is responsible for fighting it. Research shows improving nutrition helps support optimal immune function.

Micronutrients essential to fight infection include vitamins A, B, C, D, and E, and the minerals iron, selenium, and zinc.

Here’s what we know about how these nutrients support our immune system and the foods we can eat to get them.

Vitamin A maintains the structure of the cells in the skin, respiratory tract and gut. This forms a barrier and is your body’s first line of defence. If fighting infection was like a football game, vitamin A would be your forward line.

We also need vitamin A to help make antibodies which neutralise the pathogens that cause infection. This is like assigning more of your team to target an opposition player who has the ball, to prevent them scoring.

Vitamin A is found in oily fish, egg yolks, cheese, tofu, nuts, seeds, whole grains and legumes.

Further, vegetables contain beta-carotene, which your body can convert into vitamin A. Beta-carotene is found in leafy green vegetables and yellow and orange vegetables like pumpkin and carrots.

B vitamins, particularly B6, B9 and B12, contribute to your body’s first response once it has recognised a pathogen.

They do this by influencing the production and activity of “natural killer” cells. Natural killer cells work by causing infected cells to “implode”, a process called apoptosis.

At a football match, this role would be like security guards intercepting wayward spectators trying to run onto the field and disrupt play.

B6 is found in cereals, legumes, green leafy vegetables, fruit, nuts, fish, chicken and meat.

B9 (folate) is abundant in green leafy vegetables, legumes, nuts and seeds and is added to commercial bread-making flour.

B12 (cyanocobalamin) is found in animal products, including eggs, meat and dairy, and also in fortified soy milk (check the nutrition information panel).

When your body is fighting an infection, it experiences what’s called oxidative stress. Oxidative stress leads to the production of free radicals which can pierce cell walls, causing the contents to leak into tissues and exacerbating inflammation.

Vitamin C and vitamin E help protect cells from oxidative stress.

Vitamin C also helps clean up this cellular mess by producing specialised cells to mount an immune response, including neutrophils, lymphocytes and phagocytes.

So the role of vitamin C here is a bit like cleaning up the football ground after the game.

Good sources of vitamin C include oranges, lemons, limes, berries, kiwifruit, broccoli, tomatoes and capsicum.

Vitamin E is found in nuts, green leafy vegetables and vegetables oils.

Some immune cells need vitamin D to help destroy pathogens that cause infection.

Although sun exposure allows the body to produce vitamin D, food sources including eggs, fish and some milks and margarine brands may be fortified with Vitamin D (meaning extra has been added).

Most people need just a few minutes outdoors most days.

People with vitamin D deficiency may need supplements. A review of 25 studies found vitamin D supplements can help protect against acute respiratory infections, particularly among people who are deficient.

It’s true some supermarkets are out of certain products at the moment. But as much as possible, focus on eating a variety of foods within each of the basic food groups to boost your intake of vitamins and minerals.

While vitamin and mineral supplements are not recommended for the general population, there are some exceptions.

Pregnant women, some people with chronic health conditions, and people with conditions that mean they can’t eat properly or are on very restrictive diets, may need specific supplements. Talk to your doctor, Accredited Practising Dietitian or pharmacist.\

There’s no doubt about it: It’s an uncertain and scary time, but you and your loved ones still need to eat, and the act of preparing and serving a meal — even a simple one — can bring great comfort to the cook as well as to the diner. If you have a decently stocked pantry, you can make a wonderful meal out of a few staples. And if you are able to safely get to the store or have groceries delivered to you, your choices are even greater.

There’s something about starting the day with a full belly that makes everything seem like it’s going to be OK. Pancakes, waffles, a Dutch baby, biscuits and muffins are cozy options, and leftovers can be frozen for later. Granola, too. (Top your evening ice cream sundae with it later.) And if you really have some time on your hands, make breakfast an event and whip up a dish typically meant for a weekend, like eggs Benedict, English muffin casserole or biscuits with sausage gravy.

If you’re working from home, take this opportunity to make something delicious. (And maybe don’t eat it stooped over your laptop or scrolling through Twitter?) Melissa Clark’s sardine toasts with tomato and sweet onion or grilled cheese with apples and apple butter come together in a flash. If soup is what you’re craving, Alexa Weibel’s easiest chicken noodle soup or Colu Henry’s pasta e ceci will soothe your soul. Or transform that pasta in your pantry into spaghetti with fried eggs or midnight pasta, a bright and briny dish made with capers, anchovies and garlic.

For dinner, check out our collection of pantry staple recipes for dishes that require just a quick trip to your cabinet. If you have a can of tuna, try Sam Sifton’s Japanese-style tuna noodle salad or Melissa Clark’s tuna and white bean gratin. Ali Slagle is a genius when it comes to transforming a can of beans: Her one-pot rice and beans is unbelievably smart, as are her two cheesy bean bakes, white bean or black bean. If you’ve stockpiled dried beans, cook up a big pot of Melissa Clark’s herbed white bean and sausage soup or Julia Moskin’s best black bean soup. And if pasta is what you’re craving, Alexa Weibel’s creamy chickpea pasta with spinach and rosemary (use frozen spinach and dried rosemary if you don’t have fresh), and Sue Li’s creamy turmeric pasta come together in a snap. Finally, if you’ve uncovered a pound of ground beef in the back of your freezer, we suggest sloppy Joes.

If there’s ever a time for a baked good, it is now. Most of these easy baking recipes can be whipped up using what you have in your pantry, like these Rice Krispies treats with dark chocolate and pretzels. Melissa Clark’s buttery shortbread recipe can be customized in all kinds of ways, and this astoundingly moist one-pan chocolate cake, which just so happens to be vegan, can be mixed and baked in a standard 8-by-8-inch pan. If you’re really looking for a distraction, we have recipes for procrastibaking. (Or should we call it anxiety baking?) One not-exactly-easy idea: Take this time to tackle sourdough bread. Or if it’s cheering up you need, spend the day making this rainbow cake, a nod to the signs hanging from balconies all over Italy that are painted with a rainbow and the hopeful slogan, “Andrà tutto bene.” Everything will be all right.

Since many are buying food in bulk right now, health experts say it's important to stock up on foods that pack a nutritional punch.

While it is tempting to indulge on your favorite junk food, a nutritionist KATC spoke with says eating healthy is still important in the middle of this pandemic.

It's something shopper Valerie Sayers is already practicing. Tuesday morning Sayers filled her shopping cart with food that packed vitamins, minerals, antioxidants and more.

"I'm a health nut," Sayers said. "I bought a lot of fruit and vegetables which I will steam and freeze." That's exactly what dietitian, Dorian Driscoll says is what you need inside your home.

"Junk food will make you feel bad," Driscoll said. "You're not getting the nourishment you need for your body to protect itself. Look for fruits, vegetables and whole grains."

Driscoll says also look for canned veggies like corn, carrots, peas and green beans. Dirsicoll says choose foods that support a healthy gut. That's where a majority of your body's immune cells live. "With a probiotic you're putting that beneficial bacteria back into your gut and that can do a lot for you health wise," Driscoll said. Probiotics are bacteria that's good for you. You can find those in yogurt.

"By eating right, taking care of yourself, and getting proper rest you can help keep yourself in the best way possible," Driscoll said.

It's something Sayers say has helped her live a healthy life. "I try to take care of what God gave me. He blessed me at 85-years-old to be able to do all that I do. I try to take care of what he gave me."

Eating certain foods won't prevent you from getting coronavirus, but you want to have a strong immune system. It will make your body strong enough to fight the virus if you're exposed to it.